#Gutloading

##Gutloading basics 

image: https://imgur.com/TNnic22

What you feed your feeders is what makes your savannah monitors food more nutritious. Gut loading is not great for breeding your feeders, though. When you buy insects from stores they are assumed not to be gutfed unless stated. Gutfeeding is best done a day or two before feeding. you can buy commercial chow or make your own food with vegetable scraps. high protein chicken feed is great for gutloading crickets.

##Why gutloading and supplement dusting is so important
by JENIFER SOLIDA

Wild invertebrates and arthropods have access to a multitude of food sources. What invertebrates and arthropods consume can cause the nutrients available to your monitor to vary a great deal. Wild Savannah Monitors have access to and consume a wide variety of invertebrate species. In captivity, we can only reliably provide a limited number of feeder options, many of which are nutritionally incomplete on their own. Therefore, we have a responsibility to use methods available to us, gut loading and the use of supplementation, to compensate for any nutritional shortcomings the feeders available to us may have and provide the most nutritionally beneficial diet possible.

The primary issue of most insect feeder’s nutritional composition is that they are a poor source of calcium, and some having deficits in vitamin A and D.  Annelids, such as earthworms and nightcrawlers, nutritional content is not only based on what food source they are offered but also the soil in which they are housed in. 

Something else that needs to be considered is the calcium to phosphorus ratio of feeders, reptiles requiring twice as much calcium as phosphorus in their diet (Ca:P, 2:1). A way to increase the calcium content of feeders that have a natural imbalance (naturally occurring higher phosphorus content) is through dietary means, offering a higher calcium content diet.

There is a lot of focus on calcium to phosphorus ratios and fat to protein ratios when is comes to captive reptiles diet, however, studies have shown that a balance of micro-nutrients (sterols, vitamin D3, vitamin A, vitamin B complex, choline, retinol, etc)  to be of equal importance.
Since Savannah Monitors almost always suffer from some sort of malnutrition and this in turn leads to many of the illnesses, conditions and disease that we see contributing to the high early mortality rate, it is imperative that they are offered a balanced diet that can support their nutritional needs, aid in metabolism and promote healthy organ function. 

Dusting enhances the nutritional value that gut loading provides and vice versa. If gut loading alone, there is still a chance that there are deficits since both commercial and fresh options vary greatly. The other part of this is that feeders metabolize food rather quickly, so the nutrients provided by gut loading will begin to have a greater variance the longer the time has been since it last fed. This is where the dusting can aid in any deficits that may occur. Conversely, dusting alone can be problematic. There is no defined measured amounts for supplements so the amounts used vary widely between applications. Then the amount of supplement received by the monitor depends on the size of the feeder offered and how much of the product remains on the feeder prior to consumption. It is almost impossible to know if you are delivering too much or too little (thought the latter is more likely). This is why it is suggested that you use  both methods, along with providing a beneficial environment that includes temperatures and lighting that aid in metabolism of the nutrients offered.

see feeder care for how to gutload.

##CITES
Insectivorous reptile nutrion and disease. Ryan S. De Voe, DVM. Nov 01, 2010
Gut loading to enhance nutrient content of insects as food for reptiles: A mathematical approach. Mark Finke. Zoo Biology 22(2):147-162. Jan 2003

The development and evaluation of a gut-loading diet for feeder crickets formulated to provide a balanced nutrient source for insectivorous amphibians and reptiles. Lydia Attard. March 2013
Reptile nutrition and management of nutritional disorders. Julia Whittington, DVM. Oct 2011
Effect of post-gut loading time on the macro nutrient content of three feeder invertebrate species. Victoria Gorst, et al. Jan 2015

Nutrition as a major facet of reptile conservation. Olav Oftedal, Mary Allen. Zoo Biology. Vol 15(5). 1996
