#Images

Album of males: https://imgur.com/a/TilSPy1

Album of females: https://imgur.com/a/L2LCukd

#How to determine the gender of your savannah monitor 

by JENIFER SOLIDA

There are anatomical differences between male and female monitors. Male monitors have paired reproductive organs called hemipenes, usually these organs are held (inverted) within the body, everting during defecation, scenting or for reproductive purposes. Mature males may display twin bulges along the bottom of the tail near the vent, this is referred to as hemipenal bulges. Females reproductive organs are referred to as hemiclitori. There are few reliable ways to sex Savannah Monitors, which will be discussed along with unreliable/unsafe methods that are commonly promoted.

##Visual inspection

* Appearance and size: If you have done any research on the subject of sexing you have more than likely come across articles or youtube videos stating that you can sex Savannah Monitors by the size/shape of their head, the thickness of tail base, by nasal and eye size, etc. Without having a correctly sexed opposite sexed monitor for comparison these methods are impractical as well as unreliable.  There are many “delicate” male specimens and many large/bulky female specimens.

* Hemipenal bulges: As stated above, mature males may have the presence of exaggerated bulges located under the base of the monitor’s tail, indicating inverted hemipenes

* Some females can be "puffy" in the area so sometimes it can be hard to identify correctly. Unlike bearded dragons, a side view of the tail when the Sav is relaxed is a little more reliable

 
##Eversion: 

Most owners will witness this during defecation. If your monitor FULLY everts-Congratulations its a BOY! A fully everted hemipenes will look like a pair of pink tubes with what most describe as a spiky ball at the end. If there is only partial eversion, the sex organs can easily be mis-identified and considered unreliable. The lack of eversion does not necessarily mean that you have a female Savannah Monitor either, as some males are not well endowed or are “shy”/uncooperative.


##Manual 

(if anyone, including a medical professional suggests either of these method, RUN!)

##Manual Eversion: 

this is also referred to as “popping”. This is a common method used when sexing snakes. It however is not a recommended method for sexing Savannah Monitors. The reason why this is not recommended is because it is unreliable due to their hemipenal retractor muscles being especially strong, making manual eversion difficult as well as poses a risk for significant damage to your Savannah Monitor. 

##Probing:

 this method is when a well lubricated, blunt instrument is inserted into the cloaca (commonly referred to as vent). The idea is that the probe will extend further in males than in females. This method is one of the most unreliable methods as well as having a high potential of causing permanent damage including sterility. Many females probe at a relative depth of their male counterparts and it not a pleasant experience for the monitor either.
Veterinary Assisted 

##DNA testing/Hormone testing/Ultrasound/Radiograph: 

at this time none of these methods are reliable. 

##Endoscopic: 

THE MOST RELIABLE WAY TO SEX YOUR SAVANNAH MONITOR. It is an invasive procedure and does require anesthesia, so there are risks involved. There is however another benefit to this method besides learning the sex of your monitor, it is also a great diagnostic tool for detecting internal disease. “The endoscopic examination of the pleuro-peritoneal cavity in reptiles is described The physiology and pathology appearances of the heart, liver, intestines, reproductive tract, kidney and bladder are evaluated...Endoscopy also permits the diagnosis of diseases of internal organs, such as the liver, kidneys, lungs and spleen. Biopsy and sample collection for further investigations, such as microbiology, cytology, and histology, are easy to perform using this modern equipment (Journal of Exotic Medicine, 1999).
